good afternoon we have a lot of ground
to cover so we're gonna spin through
this so we may have to cut it a little
bit short well if you keep your
questions short and to the point we will
keep our answers shortened to the point
but please bear with us we have a video
call at the White House right after this
and thank you also folks for doing this
at noon instead of one I'm honored to be
joined by the woman am i right who needs
no introduction Commissioner Department
of Health Judy Percy Kelly to her right
the Department of Health's communicable
disease service medical director another
guy you all know well dr. ed Lifshitz
Thank You ed for being here to the far
left another person who's here with
needs no introduction State Police
Superintendent Colonel Pat Callahan and
to my immediate left guy who's been with
us before and from day one the
Commissioner of the Department of
Education dr. Lamont epaulette to jerod
maples who runs homeland security
preparedness thank you sir for being
here and I'm sure Matt plaque and chief
counsel will be here in a bit before we
get to the numbers today that we are
announcing that all new jersey school
buildings will remain closed for
in-person instruction for the remainder
of the 2019 2020 school year and that
all students and faculty will continue
with remote learning private schools
with longer academic years will remain
closed until at least June 30 we reached
this decision after much consideration
with Commissioner epaulette in the
Department of Education district
officials across the state and multiple
stakeholders including both educators
and parents we reached this conclusion
based on the guidance from our public
health experts and with a single goal in
mind the safety and well-being of our
children and of our educators
administrators and staff this has been
an inclusive and rigorous process
involving people with a wide range of
experiences and perspectives and because
of this process we've been able to reach
this conclusion 11 days in advance of
the deadline I had previously said we
wanted you to know when we did and to
provide certainty I had hoped that we
could get back to a sense of normal by
allowing our children to return to the
schools they loved and to be with their
friends in class
mates but the reality is that we cannot
safely reopen our schools to provide
students and families or faculty and
staff the confidence needed to allow for
a return to in-person instruction as
such the executive order I signed on
March 16th which closed our schools
indefinitely remains in effect as I have
noted before we are working with the
principle that Public Health creates
economic health or in this case public
health creates educational health if the
standards to reopen our workplaces are
high they are even higher when it comes
to schools filled with our most precious
assets our children we simply could not
find a way to reconcile that core
principle and open our school buildings
at this time the hurdles logistical
education educational and most of all
practical that would have allowed
students and faculty to return even for
a short while could not be overcome we
could not guarantee an environment that
would not only be safe but fully capable
of meeting the educational needs of
students in a setting built for social
distancing so we are directing all
district charter Renaissance County vote
tech private and other school leaders to
update their preparedness plans to
ensure the continuation of remote
learning as the father of a high
schooler
who has been attending classes remotely
for nearly two months with his siblings
by the way three of them in college
doing the same I understand the concerns
of both parents and school leaders I
understand those concerns even if I
always don't understand the assignments
I think a lot of us are in that boat and
I also fully appreciate the
disappointment that our kids won't be
closing the school year among their
friends but for us to ensure that we can
undertake a responsible restart and
recovery this step was necessary I must
note that this decision only applies to
the remainder of the 2019 2020 regular
academic year the department will be
leading stakeholder meetings alongside
district leaders educators local
officials and parent organizations to
determine whether summer education
or enrichment or other programs often at
our schools may proceed and when we make
a final determination of those programs
we will certainly announce it
additionally the Department will be
conducting the same rigorous work and
stakeholder engagement regarding the
opening of our buildings for the 2020
2021 school year in September there is a
lot to consider about how the school day
may differ once our students and faculty
return throughout all of these issues we
are keenly focused on issues of equity
where sports are concerned we are
leaning on the guidance from the New
Jersey State Interscholastic Athletic
Association against the resumption of
spring sports for the remainder of the
2019 2020 school year as well
the NJ s IAA medical board has concluded
that due to a lack of testing viable
treatments and a vaccine that spring
sports were not a viable option I know
the NJ s IAA took no pleasure in
reaching that conclusion and frankly
neither do I in stating it and this
decision I know goes beyond just
considerations of safety given kovat 19
but also to the overall physical health
and safety of our student athletes I
also know that our graduating seniors
were looking forward to their proms and
walking across the stage to receive
their diplomas in front of their
families and friends I still want to see
them have those opportunities then we
will also work with districts on safe
and creative ways to give the class of
2020 a proper send-off
to their Bright Futures I want to thank
every parent grandparent or guardian who
has been juggling everything else in
their life on top of being their child's
at-home educator I know it hasn't been
easy but I also know that you have been
extraordinary and I thank our educators
staff and administrators the best in the
United States of America who have
performed heroically with little time to
prepare for this unchartered path you
continually prove why New Jersey has the
best public schools in the United States
of
America we can also announce that the
Department has already applied for three
hundred and ten million dollars in
federal assistance for our schools which
we are entitled to and of which at least
roughly two hundred and eighty million
dollars would flow to our schools to
help them cover the costs of purchasing
educational technology cleaning and
sanitizing their buildings and ensuring
support services for students who
require them among other costs
I know Commissioner epaulette will have
more to say on this but to every student
we want you to be safe we want you to be
healthy we want you to continue your
educational journey wherever it takes
you and to ensure all of these things we
have to take this step additionally
today I am signing an executive order
that lays bare the severity of the
financial crisis we face because of
kovat 19 from both plummeting state
revenues due to the near total shutdown
of our economy and the skyrocketing
costs of fighting this pandemic I am
rescinding the executive order I signed
on June 30th 2019 which directed state
treasurer Liz Mayo to achieve a one
point two seven six billion dollar
surplus by the end of this current
fiscal year
absent significant outside assistance
this is no longer feasible no
administration and I meet no one has
been as committed to restoring our
state's fiscal foundation than ours we
have spent the past two plus years
working non-stop
to build surpluses and put money aside
for a rainy day we've reduced reliance
on one-shots to historic lows and have
made unprecedented pension contributions
while working in partnership with our
public workers to reduce health care
costs for two consecutive years at the
same time we've made significant new
investments in our schools in direct
property tax relief in mass transit and
in any number of vital programs that
serve millions of New Jerseyans each and
every day but right now it's pouring we
are on the brink of having to make very
tough and quite frankly very unpalatable
decisions regarding each of these areas
and more and we need to have these funds
as a safeguard
direct federal assistance to our state
failed to surface and today I will also
be vetoing numerous bills the
legislature sent to my desk to
appropriate money to any number of
causes in programs I don't want to veto
them but given our current fiscal
situation I have no other choice
these discussions aren't just happening
here in New Jersey either they're
happening across the nation we need the
federal government to step forward with
significant investment in our state's
both red and blue to prevent our
recovery from being held back because we
cannot fund it every governor shut his
or her state's economy to combat Kovan
19 we all will feel the devastating
impact of this necessary but costly
action across the country cuts to
critical services are inevitable and
bankruptcy is not an option this is not
about legacy fiscal issues either we
will continue our efforts to write our
financial house as we have been doing
nor is this a bailout this is about
keeping our police and firefighters our
EMTs and paramedics and our public
health workers our educators in the
hard-working folks processing a mountain
of unemployment claims among so many
others on the job and working to get us
through this a fiscal disaster is not
months away these decisions will be on
our doorstep in literally just a few
weeks Congress needs to act and act now
I will continue to work as I have with
anyone from either side of the aisle and
at every level to get this done for the
people of New Jersey but even if
Congress delivers it won't be enough we
will still need to borrow on a
short-term basis to bridge our immediate
cash flow needs for weeks I have been
working collaboratively with the
legislature to provide our
administration this authority and I
asked them today and I ask you to ask
them today to pass this legislation
swiftly so our frontline responders can
breathe a little easier even Warren
Buffett said this weekend this is a good
time to borrow money let's get this done
now let's look at the overall
overnight numbers and by the way I
believe right up front these numbers are
suspect and I wish I could say they
weren't Judy but I believe they are
we're announcing an additional 1621
positive test results for a statewide
total of 128 thousand 269 again the
number of new cases may be low as a
result of a network outage that we had
yesterday that may have been in all
cases for being processed I hope history
will prove me wrong on this but I
believe that is the case this may also
be true sadly for the reporting of new
deaths as we will see in a minute here
is the graph which shows new case
numbers and even with today's likely
incomplete count we see where we still
need to push down the curve the map
which we show you regularly of New
Jersey we have turned to as they say
most days continues to get lighter and
lighter as the rate of doubling of new
cases continues to slow again we've only
got one county left in the orange and
again those numbers in the South are a
lot smaller than the ones in the north
but the progress of both North Central
and South is unmistakable we will be
carefully reviewing these charts and
maps over the coming days to see if the
reopening of our parks was successful
but I want to thank the overwhelming
number of you who did the right thing
and took all of our asks and precautions
to heart I know many of our parks filled
up early in the day and I don't blame
you one bit for wanting to get out my
wife and I went for a run yesterday I
want to give Monmouth County a shout out
in Thompson Park in Middletown they had
the place set up exactly as the doctor
ordered folks did not congregate it was
a it was generally a very very positive
experience
the only exception and I want to hit
this point again hard not enough masks
I'd say probably 80 or 90 percent of the
folks were not wearing masks that's
something that we have to continue to
pound upon but but again the county had
set it up and we heard stories like this
up and down the state pack can give you
and will give you the compliance report
more importantly we heard very few
incidents of knucklehead behavior that
would require me to reverse course and
close them again so to all of you thank
you for helping us pass this important
test and again
Pat will give a better sense of
compliance in a few minutes as of last
night's reporting 5200 87 patients with
kovat 19 were being treated in our
hospitals this is a drop by the way of
about a thousand in just five days and
let's look at the regions across every
region of the state we continue to see
the overall stresses lessening in our
health care system again even in the
south which is seeing some flattening
the numbers on the chart will show you
that the overall numbers are lower than
they are on the central in the northern
part but even now that that that curve
is beginning to flatten our field
medical stations reported 41 patients
there were 16 hundred and ten patients
in either critical or intensive care and
this number two is decreased every day
for the past six days ventilator use
currently stands at 1189 the lowest
that's been Judy I think in over a month
there were 362 new hospitalizations
yesterday and on discharges 335 live
patients were released from our
hospitals yesterday our hospitals
continue to show the positive trends we
want and need to see if we are to get
ourselves in a steady position to get on
the road back and toward the responsible
restart of our economy these numbers are
beginning to become the underpinnings of
our overarching ideals that Public
Health creates economic health and that
data determines dates unfortunately even
with these positive trends we are seeing
we continue to lose too many residents
to Cove at 19 and with the heaviest of
hearts we report 45 additional deaths
from among our New Jersey family again
however this number is likely lower as a
result of the network outage we had
yesterday
but either way there 45 precious lives
our statewide total is seven thousand
nine hundred and ten kovat nineteen
doesn't care who it takes our losses
mirror our diversity and today we
remember three more who have been taken
from our New Jersey family this is
Michael Connors senior he had three
loves family cars
and work at first his love of cars led
to a career as an auto mechanic in
Newark but while there he made numerous
friends within the Newark Police
Department and with their encouragement
he ultimately joined their ranks in 1993
it proudly served the people of Newark
as a police officer for 26 years kovat
19 claimed him just this past Thursday
and Michael was only 58 his family says
he'll be forever remembered for his work
ethic dedication wit and fun-loving
presence Michael leaves his daughter
Dorothy with whom I had the honor of
speaking yesterday afternoon two sons
Michael jr. and Damien his adopted
daughter Samia as well as seven
grandchildren and a committed companion
Tiffany Parham and many other relatives
and friends on behalf of our state we
thank him for his selfless service and
we keep the whole Connors family in his
memory in our prayers luis fernando
marlon de there he is he came to the
United States from Colombia in Medina
when he was 22 years old he lived in
Secaucus and was a long-term longtime
employee of NJ Transit in New York
Waterway before that taking pride in his
work in and helping get people to where
they needed to go and he was one of
those who helped pilot the fairies that
shuttled residents back home across the
Hudson River on 9/11 throughout this
current emergency he continued serving
his passengers as a bus operator for NJ
Transit right until Kovan 19 took him to
he was planning to retire literally next
year and he turned 63 just two weeks ago
he will be remembered by his family
friends and co-workers for his smile his
laugh in his willingness to always lend
a hand or help others he is survived by
two children one of whom is his daughter
who was serving in the United States
military as we speak two brothers three
sisters nieces and nephews I have the
great honor to speak to one of his
nieces Kathleen Bedoya from Montclair
yesterday and we reviewed Lewis's
extraordinary
life and he leaves behind a transit
family that will not ever forget his
dedication to service and finally we
remember George Anthony Caius of
Richfield in Bergen County he was known
affectionately as Georgie it was only 27
years old when he passed on Friday
Georgie had Down syndrome and while he
could not communicate verbally he would
always show his love by showering the
people he knew with hugs and kisses he
loved music and took special joy in
watching his sisters dance recitals
where he would get lost in the music he
also loved to eat and his mom said the
best Christmas present she could give
him would be a rump roast
my kind of guy he loves Sesame Street's
Elmo and Disney's Mickey Mouse - as you
can see and he even had the chance to
meet the Meccan he brought joy to his
family and everyone he touched Georgie
is survived by his parents Anna I spoke
with his mom yesterday and that was as
tough as it gets as you can imagine his
dad burnout Bernardo his sister
Alexandra both of his grandmother's and
many more aunts uncles and cousins and
by the way beyond the tragedy of
Georgie's passing which is unspeakable
there's been a lot of challenges in that
household including one of his
grandmother's having a stroke on
Valentine's Day so they've been dealing
not only with the with the awfulness of
Kovan 19 and losing Georgie but also
other health care challenges
he was a special by every measure and
bright spirit and he was taken from us
all too soon may God bless the memory of
that guy and may his memory bless all of
us these are the faces some of the faces
that covet 19 has taken they are among
the thousands of names that we will
remember and they are the people for
whom we will continue our work to defeat
this virus it's why we will keep up with
our social distancing even when we begin
the process of restart and recovery this
weekend we saw that so many of you under
stand how this works and we thank you
for keeping your distances and please
your face coverings we need to see more
of them by the way even when you didn't
want to do either of those but there are
others who went to our parks are headed
into downtown streets who need to be
reminded why we should be wearing face
coverings and staying away from each
other and for whom we need to be role
models social distancing right now is
the only proven kovat 19 prevention I
would add face masks to that there are
no recognized treatments yet and there
is no cure there's no vaccine yet there
is only social distancing and a face
covering is about you if you are
asymptomatic lowering your chances of
spreading the virus to others that
covering blocks you from potentially
sending infected droplets into the air
to impact others including potentially
your loved ones so again thank you for
what was overall a very positive weekend
now let's step it up let's keep it up
together we will win this this morning I
want to say that we had a the first
meeting of our reopening and recovery
commission and it was Judy and I were on
it with others of our team I thought it
was an excellent discussion
it's an extraordinary group of people
and on that call chaired by by the way
the president emeritus of Princeton
University Shirley Tilghman and CEO of
Merck & Co Ken Frazier on that call we
we announced and will give more color on
this as we go forward that will be
forming other councils to advise as much
closer to the ground much more in state
we've heard from a lot of you that they
respect enormous ly the talent that we
have collected from all perspectives on
both sides of the aisle in this recovery
and reopening Commission but we also
need tactical very close to the ground
help and we'll be forming councils in
that respect as well finally I want to
give a couple of well-deserved shout
outs to some folks around the state who
have similarly stepped up during this
emergency first I want to give a huge
thanks to the palestinian-american
Community Center in Clifton
which has been working throughout this
emergency to support its entire
community the pack as it's known has
always been an active organization and
they've kicked into overdrive delivering
400 meals Monday to Friday to families
in their area and distributing 400 food
baskets to hospitals and senior citizen
centers and to police firefighters and
EMTs the pack has distributed as well
15,000 masks 50,000 pairs of gloves 1200
cans of disinfectant spray and a
thousand bottles of hand sanitizer and
it's been holding regular webinars to
keep the community informed about Kovan
19 and how we could defeat it
our state's greatest strength is our
tremendous diversity we are truly one
big family pulling together so to
everyone at the PAC New Jersey thanks
you and finally we want to give a shout
out to colleagues Woods callings Woods
Patrick Rodeo who yesterday ran 20-point
20 miles to raise money to pay for high
school yearbooks for students who cannot
afford them on their own from his run
through night park yesterday he raised
more than three thousand dollars given
today's announcement about schools in
this school year this act takes on
greater meaning for some students and
Collingswood the yearbook will be there
bank of memories of a school year that
was unlike any other because of Patrick
they'll now be able to hold those
memories
so do you pat Collingswood and new
jersey we thank you and with that I will
turn things over to the woman who needs
no introduction please help me welcome
the Commissioner of the Department of
Health
Judy personally Thank You governor and
good afternoon I'm really pleased today
to remind everyone that today is this
week is National Nurses Week the time
time to pay tribute to and thank New
Jersey's 170,000 nurses for the work
that they do every day to protect and
save lives they are caring for
kovat 19 patients and our hospitals our
critical care units our field medical
stations and our alternative care sites
they are assisting the residents of our
state psychiatric hospitals our nursing
homes and assisted living facilities
they are working at our testing sites
and they are helping our local health
departments the work they've been
performing has been challenging to say
the least as a nurse I do know that it's
one of the hardest jobs and their
bravery and services during this time
has demonstrated that there is nothing
that will hold them back from saving
lives in New Jersey they run into the
fire not away from it
this year's theme of National Nurses
Week is compassion expertise and trust
people
just trust nurses they are part of the
heart and soul of our health care system
so when you see a nurse do me a favor do
them a favor and say thank you thank you
to them for all the work that they do
last evening our hospitals reported five
thousand two hundred and eighty seven
hospitalizations of kovat 19 individuals
this number as the governor has reported
is on a steady decline there are 1610
individuals in critical care
seventy-four percent of those patients
are on ventilators significantly down
from that high of 97 percent two weeks
ago two hospitals in the central region
were on divert status last evening no
hospitals in the south or the north 395
individuals have been treated in our
field medical stations and our hotel in
Secaucus is currently reporting 64
deaths
yes excuse me 19 healthcare workers and
45 patients have been discharged from
those centers and they've served a total
of a hundred individuals at the Secaucus
hotel today we're reporting 1621 new
cases for a total of a hundred and
twenty eight thousand two hundred and
669 total cases we are reporting 45
additional deaths as the governor
reported we did have a network outage
yesterday so we are certain that that
these numbers are underreported but for
the information we have right now the
breakdown of deaths by race and
ethnicity is as follows white 52.5 black
19.5 hispanic 17.3 asian 5.3 and other
5.5 there are now 508 long-term care
facilities in the state reporting kovat
19 cases at the state veterans homes
among the census of 682 veterans there
have been 360 residents testing positive
for koban 19 and a total of a hundred
and twenty-three deaths at our state
psychiatric hospitals were the census of
1250 163 patients have tested positive
and there have been 10 deaths that is
similar to what I reported last week
according to the lab data that we have
we have tested 248,000 319 individuals
99,000 368 tested positive for a current
positivity rate of 40 point 0 2 percent
so that concludes my daily report again
please continue to follow social
distancing guidelines it definitely is
making a difference stay connected stay
safe and stay healthy
thank you Judy thank you and here's
again to the nurses in our state hundred
seventy thousand of which you are among
its ranks bless you and thank you for
your leadership
obviously reporting a lot today by the
way the the top six counties remain in
terms of positives as they have been I
don't think the overnight we're not as
confident in the overnight data so I
won't spend any time on that positivity
again continues to drift down in his ed
reminds us that's a cumulative number
the spot number is invariably going to
be lower and again remind everybody we
have a disc
portion amount of symptomatic folks in
that that won't always be the case in
fact I bet you not that long from now
that will decidedly not be the case but
it is still for the moment and so that
number going down is a positive measured
by any light obviously a big
announcement on education today please
help me welcome a great leader in that
respect and in so many the Commission or
the Department of Education dr. Lamont
repellent thank you I am also proud to
announce that this week is a designated
teacher appreciation week so happy happy
teacher appreciation week to all the
educators out there Thank You governor
Murphy and Commissioner Percy jelly to
say that this is not an easy decision is
an understatement but as governor
Murphy reminds us we must be guided by
science and the facts on the ground
I thank you governor for prioritizing
the health and safety of our students
educators and families here in New
Jersey twelve of our parents whose homes
have turned into classrooms to all of
our teachers who've pivoted to remote
instruction overnight to all of our
school district and school district and
leaders working around the clock to
ensure that students of diverse needs
are being met I am an all of your
ability to adapt and tremendously proud
and impressed and how you continue to
address complex challenges we do not
take your work and sacrifice for granted
today the announcement that New Jersey
schools will be closed to students for
the remainder of the year will
undoubtedly raise questions and concerns
I am dedicating every resources at my
disposal to answer those questions and
to quickly as we can and to ensure that
we give our educators the information
and flexibility needed to uplift our
students during this unprecedented times
in the weeks leading up to governor
Murphy's order to close elementary
schools and secondary schools the
Department of Education requires school
districts to develop emergency
preparedness plans that address critical
areas such as delivery of remote
instruction special education services
and food security given the speed at
which schools have transitioned to
remote learning and the rapidly changing
public health landscape in our state
districts have continuously revised
plans in response to these changing
conditions this announcement will
undoubtedly
require the districts to revise those
plans once again and to ensure
continuity of these key services through
the end of the school year my team will
continue to take a boots-on-the-ground
approach to support local school
districts as they rise to that challenge
and take obstacles none of us could have
envisioned when we set out to be
educators the department is also looking
forward to the future to explore what
summer instruction and the next school
year school year may look like for New
Jersey schools and students to that end
we are creating a steering committee of
diverse stakeholders to help us navigate
these issues our guiding policy
principle to this work is that each
local community knows that their
students best and our job is to provide
every flexibility we can to unlock
district innovation and to provide for
their students during these
extraordinary times while also putting
God Wells in place to uphold our high
quality and equitable educational system
I know however that this work goes
beyond plans and resources as the father
of a daughter who is graduating from
high school this spring the personal
impact of this decision hits home for me
to parents of graduating seniors please
know that I stand with you and commit to
finding ways to honor our graduates and
celebrate the incredible resilience of
the class of 2020 districts are working
on a wide variety of innovative plans
for alternative graduation ceremonies
proms and other traditional envious
celebrations my team of the Department
of Education is committed to helping
each district find solutions uniquely
tailored to the needs and priorities of
their local communities we recognize
that and our work to honor students it
is critical that we elevate their voices
and let their passion and innovative
thinking inform decisions that impact
the most when we get through this and as
the governor always remind us we will
get through this
our young people are poised to inherit
our post corporate world and we must
empower them to carve the pathways that
get us there we have been working to tap
the federal funding that can help
provide schools with the resource they
need to deliver a remote instruction
deep-cleaning school building and
address the emotional needs of students
to that in the department recently apply
for three hundred and ten million
dollars in federal funding through the
Elementary and Secondary School
emergency relief fund which is part of
the cares Act this funding can be
provided for important initiatives such
as purchasing technology purchasing
supplies to clean and sanitize schools
mental health supports activities
related to summer learning and
supplemental at the school programs
which can include online learning during
the summer to address the needs of
subgroups of students providing school
leaders with resources to address the
needs of their schools and activities to
address the unique needs of subgroups of
students and coordinating the
distribution of mills tell us what
students it is important to know that
school districts will have a great deal
of local discretion and how they use
these funds to best benefit their
students finally I would like to express
my gratitude to governor Murphy as
always for his leadership unprecedented
times calls for unprecedented acts of
leadership in humanity we're in total
totally uncharted waters facing the
kinds of decisions and challenges we
never imagined and you continue governor
to make those tough choices to protect
New Jersey students and educators thank
you as always for your resident
leadership Lamont thank you for yours as
well and I know this was not an easy
call for you for Judy for me for any of
us including in a very personal level as
you point out you got a high school
senior in your your house and and I I've
taken an enormous amount of and I know
you have as well we all have input and
in Cummings from parents and educators
and kids themselves and particular
sympathy and deep sympathy for the
seniors and I'd say yet again the
seniors who participate in something
after school particularly sports it's
not what any of us signed up for and so
it's with a in some respects a heavy
heart but this we have no choice on this
this is not a decision that's been made
based on emotions this is based on the
hard science and so thank you for your
leadership at every step of the way
Lamont deep appreciation before we throw
it to questions I'm going to ask you
each to keep it to one or two
because we're up against it a little bit
and I apologize for that
we're normally more expensive but we're
on the clock today Pat Callahan thank
you for your leadership anything you got
on compliance in particular compliance
today I think this is on everyone's mind
compliance PPE infrastructure other
matters thank you Thank You governor
good afternoon y'all start with the
weekend with regards to the parks
certainly overwhelming compliance there
we had chief Amanda Smith who's the
chief of police for the Park Police
under DEP was in direct contact with the
rock over the weekend although they hit
capacity early as the governor said
really no yo violations issued there a
few parking summonses for those folks
who parked outside where they shouldn't
once the parking lot was full but really
overwhelming compliance the shore towns
saw an influx of both vehicular and foot
traffic there was a few extra drawbridge
openings I know in Sea Bright which
caused a little bit of traffic because
the recreational boating was was kind of
through the roof I also had a call
yesterday morning with all police chiefs
from the entire state and again from
from Sussex to Cape May just
overwhelming compliance on what
everybody knows we're two gorgeous days
with regards to the EO violations newark
issued 210 and closed seventeen
businesses and Elizabeth homeowner was
cited for having more than ten subjects
at his house for a party in Bridgewater
a woman who was in a rehabilitation
facility refused commands by the nurses
to get back to the kovin floor for
cohorting and she spit and wipe the
medical equipment with the saliva that
she had spit in the East Hanover an
employee at a gas station was cited for
not wearing a mask and social distancing
and not all of the subject was cited for
being in a closed basketball court in
Patterson the subject
cited for a neo violation for not
wearing a mass and not social distancing
Patterson store owner was cited for the
second time for having a non-essential
furniture store open Rahway a subject
two subjects were cited for having a
large party East Orange subject to
subject cited for failure to socially
distance in Rozelle a non-essential
beauty supply store owner was cited
North non-essential business a car wash
was cited detail vehicle detail and in
Secaucus a subject who was initially
arrested for shoplifting at a home depot
stated to have coronavirus and coughed
again for two beautiful days
overwhelming compliance I think that
continues and we are monitoring it as we
move forward
thanks go
god bless our nurses and our teachers I
got to be here Pat thank you and again
deep appreciation to everybody out there
who really did the right thing and we
saw I saw with my own eyes and all of us
were anecdotally Department of
Environmental Protection Commissioner
Katherine McCabe I want to give a big
shout out she and I spoke on Saturday
night we exchanged last night her people
were out there
Pat's folks were out there as I
mentioned earlier in my County counties
up and down the state we're really doing
the right thing and most importantly you
all we're doing the right thing we got
to come back to you on masks I'm a big
believer that that's something we need
to be more I'm not gonna use the word
forceful but that's a that's a game
changer and again the faster we break
the back of this sucker the faster we'll
be able to get back into business but I
will say this the overwhelmingly good
compliant behavior I mentioned on on I
think Thursday and Friday and I know on
Saturday that the behavior that you all
showed everybody this weekend is going
to give us more degrees of freedom in
terms of decisions that are not just
outdoor to say
but also other decisions down the road
most importantly because I threw that
behavior the curves continue to come
down I was criticized by someone a
legislator for use of the word
knucklehead so I looked it up for myself
and I in in the definition is a stupid
bumbling inept person which i think is
quite consulter respect quite consistent
with some of the behavior Martel we're
gonna start over here with some of the
behavior paths that you have highlighted
but I was given two alternatives to
consider not by that person by the way a
blockhead or numbskull
I like knucklehead because I think it's
we started there it's got three
syllables it's got a little bit more
oomph but but to the legislator who
raised that that's the point that's the
point overwhelmingly folks are doing the
right things but for the very small
minority who are not they they need to
be called out that's why we're doing it
so hats off to everybody out there it's
so impressive in the compliance again
we're gonna ask you to keep this short
John welcome back we're gonna start with
you hold on one sec there we go Martel
thank you you're gonna be with our mic
today talk about colleges and
universities daycare centers how are
they fitting into this what metrics will
you be using to think about September
reopening and can you talk about how the
reopening of schools is linked to the
general reopening of businesses in the
state in general and on borrowing is
this the Fed bill you're talking about
borrowing or is it new market borrowing
to do short-term expenses so the
borrowing is the Fed for the time being
because the private markets are not
hospitable at the moment to say the
least even though the equity market
shows sort of these bounces one day to
the next
nothing do to report on day care to the
best of my knowledge or higher ed is
that correct math daycares will continue
to operate under executive order 110
which has the emergency day care system
and just on the bill itself it is both
private and fed borrowing and metrics
bear with us on that Lamont mention as
deny that there's going to be an
enormous amount of stakeholder
engagement including what the summer
might look like
in terms of enrichment opportunities etc
so bear with us on that we're gonna go
to the back and then we'll come down
actually Michael I didn't see you there
so we'll start here gonna mic and then
come down please good afternoon governor
what would you have needed to have seen
in the data in order to be confident in
opening schools again what did you see
I'm second graduation will be allowed to
continue to some degree what creative
ways have you already discussed and
what's kind of feasible at this point
and just third how does the current
financial situation impact state aid any
update on that impact what sorry
impact state aid how much schools are
getting yeah so to be determined on the
on the on the last question but
everything will get crushed and I'm more
worried right now about manpower and
state aid in fact it's an indirect has
an indirect impact on manpower within
our education system
I'll ask either Lamont or Judy because
they were deeply involved on this
ungraduated bear with me on that we're
trying to figure out some ways you know
everything from virtual stuff all the
way toward something down the road
depending on if the virus please God we
get this thing to go away we could find
a way to celebrate maybe in some social
distancing compliant way going forward
but we're there's a lot of good thought
being put into something on graduation
because we owe it to the seniors to give
them a tip of the tip of the cap I would
just say the nsj iaa I think even though
that was directed at sports I think you
can make that statement more broadly
you've got a balance of the school year
beyond May 15th of what looks like about
five weeks for most schools I think
Lamont and you've got you've got real
health care issues and what we would
need to prepare to make that school
reality compliant with social distancing
we don't have therapeutics or a vaccine
we've got big intergenerational concerns
even though this has been very benign
with kids we I think the experts to my
right would suggest
that there's unwitting asymptomatic
passage of this that we don't any of us
have our arms around yet and so for all
of the above reasons it felt like a
bridge too far I believe this is true
and Matt may correct me if I'm wrong
here or Mon who's been studying this I
believe were state number 46 too close
for the balance of the year it was 43 on
Thursday New York New York is now shut
for the balance remote only Connecticut
I believe is doing something similar so
we're not exactly George Washington here
but we did want to give this every shot
we could in particular for the seniors
it just feels like a bridge too far
anything you want to add to this
microphone think the governor's correct
I think we need to get more information
on social distancing I think as they
provide the standard of minimum
guidelines that we have so right now
there has been as governor mentioned
there's been a variety of ideas toss out
whether it's to have the virtual we have
a graduation in August to have virtual
graduations I think it's more of an
individualized decision however we're
going to continue to work with the
Department of Health to really kind of
ascertain more standards I think for
opening schools or doing anything has to
do with social distancing if we think
there's something fun we could do at a
state level sign us up that's that's
help healthy complain anything you want
to add on schools yeah I think we have
to realize when I get these questions as
well it doesn't seem like children are
getting hit it's hard but they can still
be carriers and I think you mentioned
the intergenerational homes and we have
to we have to be concerned about safe
safeguarding every one so you know
another five weeks does not seem like to
do that it stretched too far when you're
balancing that with the risk of more
people getting contacted with kovat
positive individuals and we're looking
at the epidemiology every day we track
new kovat cases cumulative cases
hospitalizations of kovat 19 patients
hospitalizations into critical
overall hospital availability so we're
tracking the the extent of the disease
everyday and although we see it coming
down we still have over if you by the
way I read Jersey papers every day so
don't be offended by my sighting in New
York paper and I'm probably the last
person who reads it actually Judy and I
established were the last two people who
read a physical print version but above
the fold New York Times today if you
haven't read it
why does covet hit you where where does
it hit why does it hit the amount of
unknown and open questions particularly
in the epidemiological front and sorry
to practice without a license is long
this is among experts and so the view
that we have taken if one one other way
to put it is we're gonna know a lot more
a month from now two months from now
three months from now than we know today
inevitably please question about access
to technology for education we've heard
from some families even if they have
received a computer from their district
they have multiple kids at home and
they're having to share and he plans to
quickly resolve that I understand that
with the federal aid that can pay for
some of that but how quickly do you
think that that might come through and
in terms of requirements to move ahead
to the next grade well any of those
requirements be relaxed or adjusted
because of this situation to move up
Lamont do you want to hit both of those
the federal money that you talked about
you and I talked about as part of part
of the technology reason answer I think
well I'm proud to say that the I guess
the number of districts of students that
did not have access to technology had
decreased about fifteen thousand so
districts are every day working on it
using their federal funds they currently
have title one funds using their general
funds that they have knowing the fact
that they can get money from the care
Zak allows them now to spend money
because as the governor said this is the
rainy day so they are preparing for that
so we're very encouraged to see that
that that digital divide will be
lessened as we move towards September in
regards it was the second question
requirements any loosening or yes so
we're currently working with a districts
right now to put some guidelines
I mean and so people think and ask why
are we giving our directors because
there's individual districts and there's
different needs different grading policy
that they have with their own policies
and regulations within their district so
we're doing right now is just having
communication and conversation with them
to really kind of come up with a
concrete guideline set you know because
some districts don't pass fell some
districts don't alphabet some district
and whatever their their board policy
states and regards to their retention
that's what they're gonna follow but we
encourage you with guidelines thank you
let's go Mike is that you I can't even
see I wonder with summer coming up what
you can say the state will do about
beaches that try to restrict their
access to residents only and with school
staying close now is it safe to assume
that casinos will also be closed at
least in through June 30th or have you
made a decision about casinos at this
point was that implying that some
correlation between whether our kids are
at school or casinos I'm not a lawyer
I'm gonna practice without a license I
said this I believe last week so this is
not my call this is a legal call I
believe communities cannot restrict are
not allowed legally to restrict to just
their residents is that correct Matt
yeah that is giving me the nod but as a
general matter notwithstanding a beach
decision maybe a local decision bear
with us because we think some guidance
may make sense here in fact we're
certain it will make sense we're
encouraged by the compliance in the over
the weekend with with the state and
county parks that's a good thing one of
the particular striking elements in
seeing it with my own eyes and Pat refer
to this as well was limiting parking to
50 percent as an example that may well
be a smart as folks as communities think
about how many day tickets or monthly
passes they're gonna sell maybe there's
something on the capacity side that
speaks to that but bear with us on that
we we're not we're not making any news
today on beaches yet but we do think
some general
guidance even though the decision may be
local with the exception of say Island
Beach State Park which is the States we
think some guidance is in order so bear
with us and nothing new on casinos I
think you know we we have to we have
sort of a ring of decisions to to make
and out of doors decisions to us at
least feel like they're in the early
stages of decisions we can make
indoor compact we're all aggregated
together decisions are going to be more
difficult to make let's go out we'll do
the nikita's at you and then we'll come
down to Dave and go back at Ian please
can you either speak up or get closer
bond sure Marcel so I have a couple of
questions about the R&R Commission are
its members going to be required to file
financial disclosures and will they be
given government emails and regardless
of the answer to that last one will
communications that they send on
personal lines like cell phones be
subject to disclosure under Oprah is
that it because it's an Commission that
I was created by the governor these are
the Commission members are serving in
their personal capacities they're not
subject to the same ethics and
disclosure laws and there's a long
history of this we can walk you through
it offline Nikita they're also not being
compensated as we've said before so just
they will follow any recusal policies
that we have with respect to their own
personal conflicts and we've walked each
one of them through any potential
conflicts thank you I did hi governor so
on the fiscal disaster that you were
talking about you'd mentioned you're
vetoing bills which ones are you beat
vetoing how likely do you think we'll
have layoffs and what kinds of state
programs do you think will be eliminated
or cut back significantly and then on
the whole issue of schools I know the
Commissioner mentioned there's a
committee that's being put together or
has been put together to look at metrics
about reopening summer school possibly
and then I
in the fall and you had mentioned
governor you know to be stay tuned we'll
give you more details
could you talk a maybe just in general
terms about the kinds of stuff you're
gonna be looking at because you've got
classrooms school buses lunchroom
especially younger kids you know
fighting pulling masks so off each other
that's gonna be rough I would think on
the vetoes we'll come back to you with
the specific list but they they fall
into a couple of categories Dave one is
which i think is the biggest number
bills that had been introduced and
subsequently there have been cleanup
bills that I've already signed so that
these were no longer the gating reality
we had already we had already worked
with the legislature to clean it up
secondly second category would be some
bills where we believe the feds either
are or will fund as an example Lamont
referenced the cares Act that we can get
the money out of the feds so that we
don't need to spend our precious
remaining coins third category would be
it's a noble notion but we can't
possibly execute on it fast enough to
deal with the crisis before us so you
know in other words it's a good idea but
it is we it's gonna take too long to
execute to address the here-and-now
challenge that it was intended for and
then the last category and there are
only a couple but and I don't make light
of this we just don't have the money so
they're they're completely
well-intentioned in a normal time up and
you know normal time up until a few
months ago these are things that we
would have clearly entertained but we
just don't have the shekels right now to
do that I can't give you any more color
on eliminations cutbacks layoffs but
they will be large-scale I just don't
I'm not saying that with any joy we will
have no choice and again I pray that
both we get very good interpretation of
the cares Act which we may get later on
today
that's a that's important piece that we
get a big bucket of federal direct cash
assistance through Congress and a bill
signed by the President and thirdly that
we get the flexibility to borrow which
we need our legislature to help us get
there that's an important again you
don't wake up every day particularly to
look at the two years our first two plus
years in office we were managing
aggressively that did we got elected in
part to do that to manage aggressively
structural deficits but we got no choice
at the moment and I'm not sure if you
want to add any in terms of the
deliberations you'll be expecting so as
a member of the Council of Chief state
chief state school officers all the
commissioners throughout the country
there's a framework they put for best
practices and guidelines we'll be
working off that framework and really
kind of flushing it out more and making
tailor to new jersey those guidelines
one has continued continuity of learning
which is reopening schools including
summer learning conditions for learnings
time with the safety leadership and
planning and policy and funding so those
are the four areas broad areas that
we'll be looking at using that framework
that's predicated on best practices
that's also a part of the consortium of
commissioners throughout the country
while the portion of our student
population has adapted schooling
remotely online are you concerned about
the estimated 90,000 children in the
state with no internet access at home
what will New Jersey do to keep these
kids from falling behind Commissioner
Percy Kelly how soon can New Jersey
start asymptomatic testing for residents
to get a clearer picture of how the
virus is spread and why aren't all the
residents and staff at Andover subacute
getting tested after it's become clear
the virus was prevalent there and when
is the official report on the
investigation they are going to get
released finally what percent of the
total deaths reported are attributed to
long-term care facilities thank you I
think Lamont is acutely concerned about
folks I think we've addressed this but
from day one I know I am and I know he
is concerned about you know we
deliberately took recognizing we have
over
600 school districts we took
deliberately a couple more days to bring
this to a close to go remote only in
part due to food security remote remote
learning generally and specifically
access to devices that's why as an
example you had the 30 day in advance
print the print the school program out
that lamont had worked through with a
variety of the of the districts so this
is a particular this is not ideal it is
not ideal I don't want anyone to think
that we think this is a ideal State
we're trying to keep as many people
alive as well as push forward the great
public education system do you want to
comment on that for a second before we
go yes we've been tracking this data as
the governor mentioned from day one we
currently have approximately in the
public school system 1.4 million
students we've surveyed our over five
hundred twenty-something Plus districts
and of that survey we've been monitoring
that and districts have been updating
their mergency plans and we've noticed
there's been a decrease and the number
of students that don't do not have
technology so currently right now we're
looking at approximately close to ninety
thousand students out of 1.4 million
students in the juries that do not have
access to Internet access also
technology so districts are now working
on that because that's now becoming a
new reality as we look to the future we
don't know we do not know what it looks
like in regards to social distancing so
districts are using the federal funds
that they're going to anticipate to get
from the cares Act they're using the
title funds that currently have and
you're also looking at general funds to
make sure that those basic needs of our
students are being met so they become
kind of a basic need I would just say on
testing Judy I'll turn it to you but we
finally as of the end of the week I
guess toward the weekend we have the raw
materials that we needed to be able to
at least double our testing capacity we
have other allies in the fight Rutgers
let's give them another shoutout we are
right now and I know Judy and her team
are leading this going through the sort
of the the rankings of where we're going
to deploy those resources that's being
developed as we speak communities of
particular exposure I think are our
highest we've said this already our our
highest priority so the most vulnerable
communities among us so that's as with
homes homes for developmentally disabled
Corrections system as well as densely
populated areas the notion of mobile
vans in our biggest urban centers so
we're sort of again going through a
rings of priorities but Judy I'll turn
it to you to clean clean up and give us
the the answer it deserves oK we've
identified vulnerable populations here's
a partial list Department of Corrections
we'll be starting to do universal
testing they're the veterans homes there
has been Universal testing what we mean
by that is all of the residents and all
of the employees the development don't
developmentally disabled homes have been
through Universal testing long-term care
facilities we're continuing a wide-scale
plan identifying those long-term care
facilities who have the most opportunity
to cohort negative individuals in other
words they have a lower incidence right
now and that will be brought through the
state and I and I have to give a shout
out to a number of our healthcare
facilities our hospitals are helping us
with that program which I'll be able to
give you more information fully tomorrow
seasonal workers we have a task force in
place including our FQHCs in the south
to help us with seasonal workers we
expect 12 to 15,000 that they come in
every year they work on the farms in the
south we'll be working with the growers
to make sure that we have full testing
and follow-up in isolation and
Quarantine for all of these and lastly
the inner city or populations that
cannot go to drive-through or and do not
have walk-up
possibilities we're looking at releasing
vans into those communities to increase
testing and it would be primarily a
symptom at
individuals those that first and
foremost have had contact with a
positive covet 19 patient individual
care long-term care overall we have a
complete plan for what what's the
questions the number a number of
fatalities yeah I was looking do you
have that I think it's right around a
third of all associated deaths confirmed
that sir associated with long-term care
facilities thank you
do you have one in the back I can barely
see you that's my site Thank You
governor
well the Department of Education require
the equivalent of a minimum of 180 days
of class instruction remotely our offer
districts more flexibility on that and
then add equity for children and free
and reduced lunch programs there's
really a wide range of interpretations
of the March legislation on feeding
these students some kids are being given
fresh food they picked up every day or
every other day while others are being
given a weeks or a month worth of
processed food and boxes are you
assuring any detailed guidance and how
districts should carry out free and
reduced lunch programs for the remainder
of the school year thank you Lamont you
want to hit that the I guess the first
question is any change to 180 day
minimum requirement and secondly any
color on the free and reduced lunch
guidance which I guess the question is
it's being interpreted broadly whether
it's intended that way or not as a
question please I'm aghast 180-day
statute that is law and we have not we
will continue to hold to the Hodge
elated a statue until the governor deems
otherwise as far as the the food and the
mills in the summer we have been
tracking and working with them however
we are working in close collaboration
with the Agriculture Department of
Agriculture and also the guidelines so
the districts are following the
guidelines prescribed by the US
Department of Agriculture as well as our
state agricultural program we've we've
actually observed over 200 mill sites
just to make sure that a that they're
doing what is right and then they're
follow those guidelines but secondly are
they hearing to social distance and
safety rules
so yes they are meeting the minimum
standards and regarding needs as you
said before each district is different
based off of their needs one thing I
would say is if afterward you think
there's a particular example of a
district that is not complying and that
you've heard about we'd love to know
what that is and we can get you offline
that's okay
thank you sir do you have anything no
sir
how are you Thank You governor if
businesses like supermarkets and liquor
stores can implement social distancing
guidelines and remain open why can't
other businesses use similar protocols
for example if a small retail store
could only allow one person at a time
why not let them open and on the
unemployment front over the weekend
people were having trouble accessing the
website what do you say to people who
need that money but can't access on the
first question is that's that's not a
long list of things for us to be which
we constantly do consider and observe
again remember the the core mantra so
far is stay at home and so then we've
said okay on what basis can you go out
reasonably in the parks let's put aside
supermarkets and pharmacies and etc
which will make sense and we've talked
about and we expect those organizations
as you rightfully point out they have to
make sure that social distancing and
protecting of folks is happening we
started again largely overwhelmingly
because of mental health races we need
we needed to let people get out assuming
that they adhered and complied and
overwhelmingly they did other retail
other sort of releasing the steam
clearly on a list of considerations we
need to continue to see more progress on
the healthcare curves for us to take
more steps that's not to say that this
is a lifetime sentence it's not to say
it won't come at some point sooner than
later but we're just not there yet
unemployment the only thing I could say
is we're open overwhelmed the system the
entire state system crashed over the
weekend as we've already highlighted
we're gonna come back to you we would
really I think I want to speak for Judy
I'm gonna suggest Sunday Monday Tuesday
numbers on everything we report the
averaged right to says that something
was said before but particularly ed
would you agree that the Saturday
numbers have typically been been money
good because they're really data that
was collected on Friday the Sunday
Monday and Tuesday particular with with
a system crashing it adds to that the
message I would say is we understand
your frustration stay at it we are
chopping through this we had a big
roadblock
taken away on the independent
contractors last week but by virtue of
catching up on the independent
contractor claims which had a big
backlog that a lot that didn't allow us
to get more aggressively with the
regular bread-and-butter claims that had
come in last week you then have the the
system go down but stay with it we
deeply appreciate your patience and know
that you will not lose one penny of
what's coming to you and that's probably
the most important thing to say thank
you sir well do you have something no
yep you're good okay anybody I can't
tell if someone's behind you we're good
okay
Matt we'll come to you good afternoon
related to unemployment governor thank
you answer part of my question there but
our readers have been asking if you
would consider having somebody from the
Department of Labor attendees daily
briefings to give updates given the
backlog I'm curious if that's something
you've thought about just on schools
we've heard a lot from frustration from
parents and students and officials about
the time that it took to get to this I'm
just curious if you could tell us you
know why you waited to this point even
though it is before the May 15 deadline
given the frustration and on Saturday
commissioner
you said you plan to ask the National
Guard to help staff nursing homes could
you specify what steps have been taken
or what will be taken and the task that
the guard will handle excuse me and when
they will arrive let me jump in on that
first of the stuff and then as usual
throw it to you yeah we have had the the
Commissioner here before I gets a good
suggestion actually I'm not going to
guarantee it but keep that maybe get Rob
to come in for at least a cameo we've
had
before but I think it's a it's a very
fair one listen we said this you know I
think our first deadline on schools was
April 17 and the pressure has been again
I'm accepting seniors and parents of
athletes in many cases in particular
seniors who are athletes I'm putting
that group to one side because there was
a lot of vocal and I think very
well-intentioned pressure applied from
them and I completely get it I'm sitting
next to the dad of a senior myself so
understand it the pressure has been far
more on the other side to close sooner
than make the announcement to close
sooner than later
and we took a very simple and again we
beat the deadline we promised by 11 days
I want the I want that on the record as
well but we and the we is mostly you
know Lamont and his team our team Judy
and her team we took the decision that
with each passing week we're gonna know
more I mentioned this New York Times
article today these are worlds export
experts trying to figure out why
Singapore looks like it does and some
other place that feels like a lot like
Singapore doesn't and by the way in
Singapore Judy and your point in season
I meant to say this a minute ago on
seasonal workers that's been a big
reason why they've had a flare-up for
that very reason getting that right
getting the testing right including
asymptomatic testing so so frankly the
passage of time that gives us a lot more
information than we have you know I can
tell you right now three weeks from now
we don't know a lot more than we know
today and we this is an iterative it's a
war but it's an iterative war and
because it's an elusive enemy that we're
fighting someone you can't lay your eyes
on it makes it even more challenging I
want to say one thing in Judy can
correct the record when I say this too
there's a couple of different when you
think about augmenting staffing in
nursing homes one
path that we're pursuing is actually and
you didn't ask this but is the VA so the
VA has made some exceptions in in their
deployment clearly they're in in a big
way in Menlo Park and Paramus and God
knows we needed them but they have
indicated in some places in the country
that they would they were at least
open-minded to surge capacity in non
veterans homes so that's one thing that
we are still working on Judy I don't if
you see this differently but the
challenge with the National Guard is the
following if you're a medical if you're
medically qualified in the National
Guard you're already being you you're
already working in your day job
somewhere so you've got a rob Peter to
pay Paul reality here so if you're just
say you're a nurse the chances are if
you're a nurse in New Jersey right now
in your day job the chances are probably
100% unless you're quarantined or god
forbid unless there's a medical reason
you're already working fighting kovin so
there's a robbing Peter to pay Paul
aspect here I think the piece that we
haven't spoken to is that there are
other members there are other yet again
a large population of members of the
guard who are not healthcare specific
who are not first responders who are not
already deployed in the kovat fight that
is the group that we are looking at
aggressively to take and deploy and do
non-medical stuff in our nursing homes
like cooking cleaning basic stuff that
doesn't rob Peter to pay Paul but at the
same time ads and augments to our staff
I didn't mean to go on so long but
anything you've got Judy on that exactly
what my first comment is that the
clinical people which is what we need
the most are are already called up and
working in hospitals so we're asking for
medical assistance and that they would
work under a registered nurse or a
licensed practical nurse help with site
testing janitorial cooking meal service
family communication administrative
work security logistics such as making
sure the supplies and equipment are
where they need to be and then
general-purpose so we've been on the
phone and working with the general and
his team all weekend and throughout
today so we hope to have something more
positive in the next several days but
they've been more than wanting to help
out it's just to make sure that we put
them in the right spots I don't want to
get your hopes too high on the VA front
but I just wanted to make sure I
distinguish the VA from the National
Guard and that's something that we're
trying to run the traps on as we speak
at least you're gonna close us out good
afternoon good afternoon earlier you
said that layoffs are coming do you mean
that layoffs are a certainty or only if
relief isn't forthcoming via the cares
Act and fed borrowing and my second
question is with the northeastern states
buying cooperative are you now setting
up a scenario where groups of states are
bidding against other groups of states
thank you thanks Elise and thanks to
each and every one of you for being
straightforward and brief with your
questions today again we have less time
on the clock layoffs mat will crumble
and they're already happening at
municipal levels so this is not a
theoretical argument and we can come
back to you with some of the communities
where we're seeing it but I think it's
going to be a question of scale whether
or not this is here and there or if this
is a massive across-the-board reality
and please god it is not that you know
we cannot fathom that this is the worst
healthcare crisis in our state's history
in our country's history the nine
million folks out there need more than
ever before firefighters health care
workers police EMTs
frontline essential workers we need them
more than ever before at the municipal
county state level folks processing
unemployment it's unfathomable to think
of not just spotty reductions but if
that were they'd become broad scale and
that rests almost entirely and
exclusively on the combination of
federal assistance most importantly in
size both interpretation of the cares
Act but much you know in a bigger scale
the next wave as well as our ability to
borrow I would say on the buying
cooperative I was very I meant to say
this earlier I'm glad you raised it with
the last question because I realized I
forgot to raise it myself we were very
happy yesterday I was very happy to
participate hosted by Governor Cuomo
with but with several other governors
that's already happening so the notion
of one one state
competing with another is the cake
that's the case right now I think this
is a much more adult much more sensible
way to think about it we were having a
conversation today remember the sixth
leg of the road to recovery is
resiliency that includes everything from
addressing the racial and other
socio-economic inequities that this
viruses has torn open and allowed sadly
to see in vivid detail but also to the
very specific cold-blooded
how many ventilators do we have in stock
etc and you can see the real potential
implications of a buying block that
includes the seven states that have been
aggregated in this Regional Council you
know that that aggregation of economic
clout probably I'm going to say with the
possible exception of California which
by the way if it were its own country
would be the fifth or sixth largest
economy in the world that buying power
that economic power would be you know
would rank five six seven in the world
and so using that to our advantage when
you sit across the table from
manufacturer X or Y that to me gives you
an enormous leg up I'd say one other
thing I think it it without question
advances our bill
to make this stuff not just in the USA
but to make it in the region and I hope
a lot of it in New Jersey it's this this
virus has torn open the racial and other
inequities in our society for full view
it's also ripped off any masking of the
of the enormous Dib munition of
manufacturing capacity in this country
and we're not immune to that New Jersey
is not immune you know when we say that
as we've said last week that gowns of
the new ventilators I think folks can
appreciate that a ventilator well it may
not be a an airplane it's got a lot of
moving parts but gowns for crying out
loud Judy we there's no there's no good
answer to that and I think this Regional
Council gives us also a leg up to say
you know what let's have a strategy to
actually make this stuff not just have a
better negotiating position but let's be
more likely we can make it I'm gonna
mask up as I conclude here I want to
thank I forgot who gave this to me but
somebody sent this American flag mast to
me which I wear with great honor so we
will be back together tomorrow unless
you hear otherwise at 1:00 p.m.
in this room this is a big decision day
for us of this decision on on remote
learning and education for the balance
of the school year is a big one and it's
not one we take lightly and I want to
thank everybody beginning with the
Commissioner and Lamont to you and your
team Judy to you and Ed and your team
and the inputs that you gave and
obviously for your leadership generally
to the educators administrators moms and
dads kids others who weighed in this is
this is a tough decision but it's the
right decision I want to again thank
everybody for being so good this weekend
please keep that up you've been
extraordinary
the more we keep that up the more the
curves flattened the better and sooner
we can begin to really take the other
steps we need to take to reopen again
Judy ed Thank You Lamont to you Thank
You Colonel thank you as always
Jared Matt others thank you God bless
you all we'll see you back here at one
o'clock tomorrow